---
layout: post
title:  GNU Bash & The Diverse Unix-Alike Ecosytem
date:   2019-05-25 23:58:00 -0500
tags: [bash, gnu, unix, linux, shell]
---

A lot of developers I talk to don't really know what
[bash](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/) is. If I call it "the command line",
*then* they get it. "Oh, yeah, the thing I've got to pop open to `git push`, or
`npm start` or `pip install`. Yeah, I get it. Why, what about it?"

I have no intention of shaming those folks. For most developers (especially
modern ones), that's all they need to know: it's a command-line window that they
use to do a few things with their software to get it to run. And that's totally
fine.

But *man*, was I enthralled by `bash` when I first started using it. Yes, it's
the command line. Yes, I need it to install libraries for my project. Yes, every
now and then I'd Google how to do something, and find arcane shell voodoo to
solve some problem I had. But I didn't come to appreciate what `bash` *really*
is, or what it can *really* do for me, until I started diving deeper into my
tech stack.

`bash` is a *shell*; it's a piece of software that wraps around your system's
kernel (like a... shell). The kernel is the piece of software that ultimately
handles the translation of software instructions, to hardware functions. In this
way, a shell is the closest human-readable interface to this low-level tooling.
A shell can be the "glue language" of an operating system -- it can be used to
manage how your software tools interact with one another. It's and incredibly
powerful tool family that is often overlooked unless you have an explicit use
case for it.

`bash`, specifically, is a GNU-enhanced version of the original Unix shell
program, `sh`. It's very mature & stable (it was first released in 1989), but
still under active development. As with most software, `bash` is the name of the
software itself and of the programming language required to interface with it.
The language is quite feature-complete: it has support for conditionals,
iteration (loops), arithmetic operations, and other common features of most
programming languages. And yet, most modern developers have never even heard
`bash` called by its name, let alone explored it beyond commands specific to
their own software.